<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?> 
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [
 <!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/"> 
]>
 
<TEI.2 lang="en"> 
<teiHeader> 
  <fileDesc> 
    <titleStmt> 
      <title>My First Battle</title> 
	  <title type='sub'>A Sergeant's Story</title>
      <author><name reg="Mickiewicz, Adam">Adam Mickiewicz</name></author> 
	  <respStmt>
        <resp>Translated by:</resp>
        <name reg="Noyes, George Rapall">Jimmy O'Regan</name>
      </respStmt>
    </titleStmt> 
    <editionStmt> 
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition> 
    </editionStmt> 
    <publicationStmt> 
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher> 
      <date value="2009-03-07">March 7, 2009</date> 
      <idno type="etext-no">28277</idno> 
      <availability> 
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p> 
        <!-- Librivox dedication -->
        <p>The person or persons who have associated work with this 
        document (the <q>Dedicator</q> or <q>Certifier</q>) hereby either 
        (a) certifies that, to the best of his knowledge, the work of 
        authorship identified is in the public domain of the country 
        from which the work is published, or (b) hereby dedicates 
        whatever copyright the dedicators holds in the work of authorship 
        identified below (the <q>Work</q>) to the public domain. A certifier, 
        moreover, dedicates any copyright interest he may have in the 
        associated work, and for these purposes, is described as a 
        <q>dedicator</q> below.</p>
        <p>A certifier has taken reasonable steps to verify the copyright 
        status of this work. Certifier recognizes that his good faith efforts 
        may not shield him from liability if in fact the work certified 
        is not in the public domain.</p>
        <p>Dedicator makes this dedication for the benefit of the public 
        at large and to the detriment of the Dedicator's heirs and 
        successors. Dedicator intends this dedication to be an overt act 
        of relinquishment in perpetuity of all present and future rights 
        under copyright law, whether vested or contingent, in the Work. 
        Dedicator understands that such relinquishment of all rights 
        includes the relinquishment of all rights to enforce (by lawsuit 
        or otherwise) those copyrights in the Work.</p>
        <p>Dedicator recognizes that, once placed in the public domain, 
        the Work may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, used, 
        modified, built upon, or otherwise exploited by anyone for any 
        purpose, commercial or non-commercial, and in any way, including by 
        methods that have not yet been invented or conceived.</p>
      </availability> 
    </publicationStmt>
     <sourceDesc> 
      <bibl> 
        Created electronically.
      </bibl> 
    </sourceDesc> 
  </fileDesc> 
  <encodingDesc> 
  </encodingDesc> 
  <profileDesc> 
    <langUsage> 
      <language id="en"></language> 
      <language id="pl"></language> 
      <language id="la"></language> 
    </langUsage> 
  </profileDesc> 
  <revisionDesc> 
    <change> 
      <date value="2009-03-07">March 7, 2009</date>
      <respStmt> 
        <name> 
            Translated by Jimmy O'Regan (With thanks to
            Mariusz Florczak, Sebastian &amp; Ania Mikulicz,
            Tomasz Mikulicz, and Joe O'Regan, Sr., for their
            assistance).
        </name> 
      </respStmt> 
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item> 
    </change> 
  </revisionDesc> 
</teiHeader> 
 
<pgExtensions> 
  <pgStyleSheet> 
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet> 
 
  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1"> 
    <char id="U0x2014"> 
      <charName>mdash</charName> 
      <desc>EM DASH</desc> 
      <mapping>--</mapping> 
    </char> 
    <char id="U0x2003"> 
      <charName>emsp</charName> 
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc> 
      <mapping>  </mapping> 
    </char> 
    <char id="U0x2026"> 
      <charName>hellip</charName> 
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc> 
      <mapping>...</mapping> 
    </char> 
  </pgCharMap> 
</pgExtensions> 
 
<text lang="en"> 
  <front> 
    <div> 
      <divGen type="pgheader" /> 
    </div> 
    <div> 
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" /> 
    </div> 
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Adam Mickiewicz</p>
<p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">MY FIRST BATTLE</p>
<p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A SERGEANT'S STORY</p>
</div>
</front> 
<body> 
<div rend="page-break-before: always"> 
<p>They envy Attila, who fought a thousand battles, and in the thousandth
still felt that, which he called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gaudia certaminum</foreign>, that is, the delight 
in the slaughter. Oh, that old general was a lecher of blood. As far as I 
am concerned, holding the rank of light artillery sergeant, I confess, 
that I was truly in love with war, but only during the first week of my 
military career, and that only one single time I tasted Attila's delight. 
For this reason my honeymoon and first battle will never leave my 
memory.</p>

<p>The first battle has the most particular similarity to first love. How 
many hopes! how many illusions! before this ceremonial action, which 
resolves the fate of nations, any recruit feels obliged  to play at least 
a role&hellip; as a hero of history or a romance.</p>

<p>It finally comes to the trial and you stand before it with impatience 
and a certain anxiety, experiencing once mortal terror, then again a 
crazed joy; now fear pierces you, now the pride of the triumphant picks 
you up.. In one hour you pass through crowds of emotions, and you collect 
keepsakes for your whole life! but in order to feel it in full force, you 
must have the heart of a virgin, the heart of a recruit.</p>

<p>Someone said that every man can compose a good romance, telling only 
the simple story of his first love. This insight encouraged me to describe 
the first battle, in which I was. You need to know that this battle is 
only an episode of a famous war, that in it we achieved a great victory, 
and that in its time it won us the admiration of the European people. 
Admittedly, these are times long past, because people have well forgotten 
both about our defeats and about our triumphs. In spite of this, the 
Polish soldier will never forget about the Battle of Stoczek.</p>

<p>After the revolution of the 29th of November<note place='foot'><p>1831.</p></note>, I decided to join the 
ranks, and I pondered, whether to the infantry, or to the cavalry? To make 
a definite choice, I ran through the streets of Warsaw, eyeing closely the 
uniforms of several regiments. I stopped ahead of a battalion of 
grenadiers, who marched in tight rows, silently, in order and seriously. 
Each moustachiod, with chevrons on his shoulders. These were the remains 
of the Napoleonic legions. As they passed, they were yielded to with the 
utmost respect, and they were whispering in the crowd: <q>There are my 
soldiers! there are our defenders!</q> I envy them, I thought, it's a 
beautiful thing to be a grenadier! And I approached the division, and 
having taken the place beside the drummer, I marched in the grenadiers' 
step, singling out the commander, to whom I immediately wished to offer my 
services.</p>

<p>Suddenly, on the other side of the street, a new military meteor 
appeared to me. He was a Krakus<note place='foot'><p>
A soldier of the Cracovian cavalary. <q>Krakus</q> is an
alternative name of <emph>Krak</emph>, the legendary 
founder of Cracow, and is used to refer to an inhabitant
of the city.
</p></note> on a white horse, in a white <foreign lang='pl' rend='italic'>sukmana</foreign><note place='foot'><p>
A type of tunic, of Turkish influence, typical of Cracow. 
</p></note>, in a 
red cap with a white feather, which cut like a swan through black waves of 
crowding townsfolk. He turned his horse beautifully; he welcomed 
pedestrians with a nod, with cavalrymen squeezed hands, and to beautiful 
ladies, standing in windows, sent grateful kisses. All eyes turned towards 
him; men clapped, women smiled in silence; and the beautiful Krakus became 
the god of the moment.</p>


<p>It came to my mind right away, that a Krakus' uniform at my age and 
height would suit me better, and so my true calling manifested itself: God 
had made me a Krakus!</p>

<p>So I turned in the direction of the cavalry barracks; but halfway 
across the road I fell into the immeasurable crowd who captured me into 
itself and bore towards the tollbooths.  The people pressed to meet the 
newly approaching rows. A stranger figure rode at the front; it was it is 
an old Capuchin in habit and on a horse, in one hand a lance and the other 
blessing people with a cross, who kissed his legs. Behind the Capuchin 
followed a thousand archers from the Augustów forests. They had slung 
double-barrelled guns and badger skin bags with claws and bared teeth, 
whitening on green jackets. Another thousand villagers, armed with crooked 
scythes and axes, brought up the rear of the procession. Never had the 
entrance of the most beautiful regiments, even the entrance of Prince 
Józef at the head of victorious legions, aroused such enthusiasm, as this, 
with which the people of Warsaw greeted badger skin bags and bark clogs. 
Now there wasn't applause, or smiles, but shouts, thundering hurrah! and 
blessings, mixed with loud crying. Because the people, surprised by their 
own instincts, could seize the noble and beautiful side of the image. At 
the sight of these priests, of these farmers who had left monastic cells 
and their forests, in order to beat the enemies of the homeland, people 
understood the whole horror of danger, and also comprehended with complete 
trust that it was the only means of defense.</p>

<p>I was overcome by a sudden temptation to steal immediately behind the 
scythe or double-barrelled gun and to join the row with the peasants in 
order to share with them the triumphant entry to the capital. But how to 
do it? how to fit myself in with the bold and taunting movements of 
Mazowian scythe-bearers, or the grim expressions and wild shooters from 
the Nieman? How to match them in the height and breadth of their backs? 
amongst these giants I would look like a rabbit among wolves. So what will 
I do with myself? Should I be a Krakus, or a grenadier! This uncertainty 
cost me dearly.</p>

<p>A colonel of my acquaintance met me in passing, and patting me on the 
shoulder, said: <q>I am in  command of a guerrilla unit; some of my people 
have already left for the field, I myself am setting off today from 
Warsaw, I need gunners; perhaps you know where I can find them?</q></p>

<p><q>I know about one,</q> I said, assuming a military posture; <q>you 
need a gunner, here you have him!</q></p>

<p><q>Agreed!</q> the colonel said, <q>put on a uniform and be at my place 
this evening at ten o'clock exactly, do you understand?</q></p>

<p>Soldiers were being recruited in this manner during the uprising. That 
day at eleven at night I marched in uniform by the cannons. During the 
march we trained ourselves in the use of weapons, and I added so much 
urgency, that after three days I was appointed sergeant and a cannon was 
placed under my orders. The envious claimed that I had owed my rank to the 
colonel's peculiar considerations.</p>

<p>After all, I myself was surprised, confused and almost ashamed at such 
a sudden promotion. My head spun and only after a few hours of  
astonishment did I start to feel the influence of my new dignity. 
Involuntarily I adopted a martial and more serious face; having gravely 
stretched my right hand, I laid it on my property, on the muzzle of the 
cannon. This large piece of bronze, I thought to myself, will be a pillar 
in the temple of my fame; will be the first step in my knightly 
profession, or perhaps even lead me to the throne! A well aimed cannon 
often settles the fate of a war. And how did Napoleon get his start, if 
not as a gunner? Full of these dreams I fell in love with my bronze cannon 
as if with a young girl and from then on I was always beside her. I 
examined her defects and attributes, I debated character and got to know 
most precisely her entire composition and nature; physical as moral. She 
is so well engraved in my memory, that I could paint her portrait from 
memory. I knew sound of her voice so well that I could have recognised it 
amongst the roar of the liveliest cannonade, even if it were Leipzig, or 
Ostrołęka. My beloved cannon! what happened to you? into whose hands did 
you fall? Certainly nobody will caress you as I did&hellip; Only that thought 
comforts me. She was admittedly a little eight pounder, but to me she was 
huge, as she was pregnant with my entire future. As well as well settled, 
simple to manoeuvre and with a strangely accurate shot. A whole day was 
barely enough for me in fulfilling my duties by the beloved cannon, and at 
night I didn't stop thinking about the object of my love. And so, one 
night I dreamed of battle, and who did I see opposite me? Field Marshall 
von Diebitsch! At once I take aim&mdash;poof! and my cannon ball cuts him in 
two. I took off, to tear off his head and carry it still warm to our 
Commander-in-Chief, Prince Radziwiłł; but the corpse of von Diebitsch was 
so heavily defended, that until I awoke completely into reality, instead 
of the head of the Muscovite leader, I held the head of the gunner 
sleeping opposite me. Another night a worse thing happened to me: I 
dreamed that the Muscovite cavalry fell on us unexpectedly; they killed me 
in advance, then cut down my gunners, and finally a Muscovite cuirassier 
mounted my cannon like a horse and started to plug it, looking at me with 
contemptuous eyes. Then I felt all the torments of the husband of Lucretia 
and the torments of the father of Virginia. Although I was already a cold 
and stiff corpse, nevertheless I gathered all my strength to give some 
sign of life and adjusting to myself, I managed at last to scream so 
strongly, that I both woke myself and alarmed the entire camp. Having 
jumped to my feet, and just as day was beginning to break, my eyes seek my 
cannon and I see with no little joy, that she's there, that she sits free 
and calm on her carriage.</p>

<p>Her open jaws seemed to draw the coolness of the morning, and the 
gleaming surface reflected the first rays of sunshine. I lay down again on 
the wet ground, but this time as a precaution I held on to a spoke.</p>

<p>So passed a whole week, my first week after marrying the beautiful 
eight pounder: the honeymoon of an artillery sergeant, the happiest week 
of my life! I kept busy every moment, in the belief that I had already 
achieved the purpose of my existence in world; my soul went completely 
into the beloved cannon.</p>

<p>Meanwhile we drew closer and closer to the banks of the Vistula; ice 
was already giving way in many places and  here and there you could see 
water appearing. Our colonel, with a long pole in his hand, was first to 
go through the ice, wading in the water up to his knees, then he ordered 
us to follow him. Follow him with our cannons over such weak ice? At this 
order I went pale as death, because our entire military future could 
drown. In the end we passed happily and we stopped on the opposite bank 
with the shout: Long live Poland!</p>

<p>That same evening saw the joining of the corps, with the front sent 
from Warsaw. They awaited us impatiently; because young soldiers have an 
elevated opinion of the power of artillery, and it worried them very much 
that on the eve of the expected battle they had no cannons. Having heard 
the rattle of cannon wheels, the whole camp lost possession of itself in 
joy: <q>our artillery approaches! Long live the artillery!</q> they called from 
all sides and ran to meet us, and placed us in the centre of the camp.</p>

<p>We also enthusiastically greeted our comrades. Until then marching in 
loneliness, now we were in a crowd of brave soldiers, whose number gave 
itself significance to the eye. That raised our confidence. Only 
altogether there weren't more than twelve squadrons, filling a wide area. 
Proudly we looked at a forest of stuck lances, on which new flags sparkled 
with colours, still not knowing blood or dust. After a cheerful and grand 
supper we lay down to sleep, swung with the sound of military music and 
the singing of the mazurka.</p>

<p>At dawn, when our corps entered the village, mixed shouts reached us. 
We pulled in; they sent for reconnaissance and it turned out that these 
were shouts of victory! The first triumph! You should have seen, how 
pleased we were with them. These Cossacks, bearded, disarmed, walked with 
heads lowered and with sour expressions. As they went by us, our young 
soldiers jeered at them, cursed or threatened. And I had a desire to do 
the same, but the duty attached to the rank didn't permit it, so severely 
reprimanding them, I said: <q>Poles! respect misfortune! The fate of war is 
often doubtful! Death to our enemies! Mercy to the conquered! Long live 
Poland!</q></p>

<p>The soldiers calmed down, taken aback by the nobility of my emotions 
and sententious eloquence. For some time my attention turned to one old 
gunner, riding beside me, who constantly climbed in his stirrups, lifted 
his head, neck craned over the shoulders of his comrades.</p>

<p><q>What are you looking at, Mateusz?</q></p>

<p><q>At those beasts, sergeant, may the hangman take them</q>&hellip; and 
pointed his finger at hills, which were ahead of us. I saw then, how something 
was blackening the hilltop. Where they bushes, or the caps of the Muscovite 
infantry? I didn't have time to look longer, because the officers came running, 
calling with all their might: <q>Forward artillery! stand in position!</q> We 
moved, every horse jumping. A cannon shot and the ball, having killed one of 
our horses, rained earth on us and flew onwards, ricocheting. We occupied the 
hill, directly opposite the enemy, who doubled fire.</p>

<p>A wide plain, surrounded by bushes and forest, stretched before us. In the 
centre of it, on the hill, rolled a Muscovite battery of twelve heavy gauge 
cannons who powdered us with cannon balls and grenades. Behind the battery you 
could see thick ranks of cavalry, standing motionless. Our cavalry similarly 
stood calmly, leaving time for the operations of the artillery.</p>

<p>I noticed that soldiers of different weapons throughout the battle preserved 
the stance and the facial expression characteristic of themselves. And as the 
artilleryman has neither the cavalry's extravagance, nor the infantry's 
impatience, but attentive to command, fast and accurate amid all the commotion, 
appearing calm, though his eyes burned with the smoke, bloodshot, eyebrows 
furrowed, face pale, mouth clenched, speech short and hard, expressing fierce, 
suppressed and concentrated fury.</p>

<p>In the middle of this fire, even though death swept past their heads, they 
didn't stop making jokes; every time each cannon ball ricocheted, the young 
soldiers made a point of talking to it, and to give it advice. A ricocheting 
cannon ball can be seen from afar, as it jumps across the field, so if it was 
going to one side, to the left, they were calling to it: <q>Where are you going, 
blind man! get to the right!</q> and if it was going straight, they encouraged 
it: <q>good, good!</q> and so they spoke to it until it fell  right in the 
middle of the enemy line and then they were applauding it.</p>


<p>I don't know now, how many hours that cannonade lasted. Although we 

passed each other feverishly beside the cannon, in the same way this play 

lasted too long, to not wish for nightfall. The Russian artillery had an 

obvious advantage over us, both in numbers, and in cannon gauge. They had 

already hit a few of our people, many were wounded, but everyone, although 

extremely tired, equally didn't sink in spirits and nobody even thought 

about retreat.</p>

<p>Suddenly from the left cannons roared horribly. The Muscovites had 

placed a new battery right there, which fired at us from the side. We 

turned two of our cannons against this new threat, with whom we needed to 

chat; but our position was becoming more and more unpleasant, because six 

field cannons to answer twenty heavy gauge cannons is no small matter! Our 

soldiers, at the sight of this imbalance of power, seemed to be stirred. 

Now their movements weakened, now our shots happened less frequently, and 

what's more the anecdotes and jokes ceased completely.</p>

<p>It seems that our commander was waiting until the Muscovites separated 

their forces, in order to profit from that moment and strike them; I 

suppose, although they aren't tempting themselves to debate the battle 

plan. I only know that at the most critical moment we heard from the left 

a horse's hoofbeat, rushing at a gallop and a few minutes later that 

second battery went silent, when it was conquered.</p>

<p>Our commander turned around and dashed to the main strength of our 

troops, calling: <q>Forward at a trot! everyone forward!</q> And our entire 

cavalry, drawn up in two rows, moved out, passing our battery. <q>They're 

going to charge!</q> cried our gunners and at once we ceased firing. How did 

it look? The young lancers with eager gaze, fevered face, burst 

impatiently forward, but advised or unadvised they still needed to obey 

the strict orders of the commander, who still repeated: <q>Trot! forward! 

trot!</q> You could see from the movement of the flags, how feverishly the 

soldiers' hands were twitching. In the end the trumpets sounded, flags 

descended and now they kicked themselves off towards the enemy. <q>Forward! 

Gallop! everyone forward!</q></p>

<p>They took off&mdash;we stayed by our cannons, doing nothing, and even 

thinking nothing. The artillery recently so busy and noisy, now seemed to 

be petrified. Our souls flew far and rested on the tips of the lances. Now 

the Muscovites are close! Already the Muscovite ranks are deploying, in 

order to receive them. The gunners climbed on the gun carriages, on the 

ammunition carts and stare into space, looking ahead with gaping mouths; 

it was so quiet that you could hear the flight of a fly. Each of us felt, 

that on this clash hung our fate, the fate of our army, perhaps even our 

homeland! It was a moment of expectation and terrible uncertainty, luckily 

lasting only a few minutes. Our cavalry clashed with the Muscovites on the 

high ground, both lines clashed with each other and mixed.</p>

<p>In the whole of this mass it boiled and the whole mass disappeared, 

like a dust cloud driven by the wind.</p>

<p>I don't know who, but someone among us shouted at the top of his 

lungs&mdash;that shout broke the deathly silence, because he proclaimed 

victory, however nobody accompanied him. Because we, young soldiers, still 

we weren't understanding, nor guessing the outcome of this battle, but 

besides that we feared to yield to premature joy. <q>Wait!</q> someone or other 

said&mdash;<q>as yet there's nothing certain; nothing to be seen, everyone 

seems to have disappeared!</q></p>

<p>Finally, the part of the mass that we could see, as it vanished from 

our sight, started to come towards us. By their colours we recognised our 

lancers and by the war cry: Poland Is Not Yet Lost.<note place='foot'><p>
The first line of <q>Dąbrowski's Mazurka</q>, now the National Anthem of
Poland.
</p></note></p>

<p>Now there's no doubt, victory is ours! The approaching mass presented a 

peculiar spectacle. In it you could see a lot of foot soldiers with 

diverse weapons, in addition wagons, ammunition carts, artillery 

pieces&hellip; There were Muscovite prisoners, captured with the artillery 

and the whole encampment.</p>

<p>I wouldn't be able to describe our joy, this frantic joy! How can it 

be! their whole artillery! this mighty artillery in our hands. We rushed 

headlong upon these cans, pressing them, caressing them, and I myself for 

a moment forgot about my love, the eight-pounder.</p>

<p>Beautiful they were, these Russian cannons, so huge, new, well mounted 

and stocked with everything.</p>

<p><q>Look, sergeant</q> the gunner Mateusz called out <q>look at 

what red, shining cannons these cursed Muscovites<note place='foot'><p>
Untranslatable: Mateusz here uses the non-human form, echoing his
earlier use of <q>beasts</q>
</p></note> have!</q></p>

<p>I started with a delicate hand to stroke the polished bronze surface, 

and everyone repeated in chorus: <q>Oh, but how these muscovite cans do 

shine!</q> <q>and what a calibre</q> noticed one gunner, <q>that's the calibre for 

me!</q> <q>that's no peashooter!</q></p>

<p>I started measuring the muzzle of the cannon, and the soldiers 

repeated: <q>those jaws are no joke!</q></p>

<p>Then, when we started examining the harness, then again they called as 

a choir: <q>Oh, what sturdy straps those cursed Muscovites have!</q></p>

<p>Nobody will guess in the end, what caused us the greatest joy; it was 

none other than ordinary oats, taken as spoils. Our cavalry didn't have 

any more fodder, but the Muscovites had it in ample amounts; their wagons, 

caissons, gun carriages even, were full of oats. Soldiers rushed on them 

hungrily, filling sacks with them, cartridge cases, pockets, and saying 

that they had  never seen such beautiful oats.</p>

<p>The leader rode up and at the sight of him a shout of enthusiasm and 

worship thundered. Perhaps he was very tired, because despite a cool day, 

sweat flowed from him in drops.</p>

<p>We surrounded him in a dense crowd. Amid the general commotion and 

bursts of joy, he alone was calm and silent, though visibly moved.</p>

<p><q>My children,</q> he said to us, <q>I promised to lead you to the enemy; you 

promised to beat him&mdash;and so both you and I have kept our words.</q></p>

<p>Such was our memorable day at Stoczek. With night falling stories began 

by the camp's bonfires, there were no listeners, because everyone spoke; 

everyone bravely acquitted themselves in battle, everyone had 

jokes&mdash;because everyone was happy.</p>

<p>If that blessed hour comes to me, that I can again fight for my 

country, to see the Muscovite army in panic, to seek out my beloved eight 

pounder and to hurl cannon balls from it at golden roofs of the Tsarist 

capital city, then I will call myself happy; but even then I wouldn't be 

able to feel that, which I experienced in the first battle, in the 

memorable Battle of Stoczek.</p>
</div>
<div>
<pgIf output="html">
  <then>
    <div>
      <divGen type="footnotes" />
    </div>
  </then>
</pgIf>
<pgIf output="txt">
  <then>
    <div>
      <divGen type="footnotes" />
    </div>
  </then>
</pgIf>
</div>
</body>

<back> 
<div rend="page-break-before: right"> 
  <divGen type="pgfooter"/> 
</div> 
</back> 
</text>
</TEI.2>